doc: tilebuffer tutorial (#245)
AmigaPorts/ACE: docs/programming/tilebuffer.md

> # Multi-directional Scrolling (TileBuffer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scrolling large tilemaps with TileBuffer
```

Author: See other comment.

I added also this sentence :

NOTE: theoretically, multi-directional scrolling can be done with simpleBuffer but with large map you need a lot of RAM.

## Basic description

> This tutoriel only focus on multi-directional scolling as used for RPG or games like Alien Breed, Chaos Engine or large platform game like Turrican or Superfrog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will focus on multi-directional scrolling as used for RPG or games like Alien Breed, Chaos Engine or large platform game like Turrican or Superfrog.
```

> In order to do this multi-directional scolling, in ACE you need to use  the [managers/viewport/tilebuffer.h](../../include/ace/managers/viewport/tilebuffer.h). It manages for tiled background/map as a main entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although you could use simpleBuffer for drawing and scrolling large tilemaps, it would eat a lot of RAM. In order to do this efficiently, you need to use the [managers/viewport/tilebuffer.h](../../include/ace/managers/viewport/tilebuffer.h). It's specifically design for drawing tiles and scrolling in any direction.
```

## Prerequisites

The tile manager takes 2 pre-requisites :

1. a set of tiles
2. a map using this tiles.

Last pre-requisites, you need the *palette* linked to your tiles graphic. [See Palette Tutorial](./palette.md)

### Prepare the set of tiles

> Let's use this ressource from open game art : https://opengameart.org/content/overworld-grass-biome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use this resource from open game art: https://opengameart.org/content/overworld-grass-biome
```

> Get `TilesetGrass/overworld_tileset_grass.png` and convert it in 32 colors (use [grafx2](http://grafx2.chez.com/) for example).

Reviewer: Since most of the tutorial concentrates on Aseprite, it would be good to give Aseprite instructions here too

Reviewer: What do you think about this?

Now using [aseprite](https://www.aseprite.org/]).

Do `File > Import > Import Sprite Sheet`  it in asesprite in 16x16 sprites.

Apply plugin [Aseprite Script: Amiga OCS/ECS Color Palette Mixe](https://prismaticrealms.itch.io/aseprite-script-amiga-ocsecs-color-palette-mixer) to align png and palette to amiga capacity/rgb colors.

> Then do `File > Export >  Export Sprite Sheet` and then `File > Saves As` and save as `overworld.png`.

Reviewer: Not sure about my suggestion because I don't have aseprite and can't really tell if "16x16" is an option in that dialog.

again, not sure if we should go with 1-2-3 steps or 1-1-1.

```suggestion
1. Select `File > Import > Import Sprite Sheet`. Select 16x16 sprites option.
2. Use plugin [Aseprite Script: Amiga OCS/ECS Color Palette Mixe](https://prismaticrealms.itch.io/aseprite-script-amiga-ocsecs-color-palette-mixer) to align png and palette to amiga capacity/rgb colors.
3. Select `File > Export >  Export Sprite Sheet` and then `File > Saves As` and save as `overworld.png`.
```

Author: Oh missed this one. On it.

The file is ready for use here : [overworld.png](./res/overworld.png)

> Don't forget to export the [palette](./palette.md) as `overworld.gpl`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, be sure to [export the palette](./palette.md) as `overworld.gpl`
```

1. Create new Project
2. Click on `New Tileset...`
3. Load `overworld.png` set it to 16 x 16
4. Then `New Map...`
5. Choose `Orthogonal`, `CSV` and `Right Down`, `200` tiles x `100` tiles and `16px` tile size
6. Draw a map
7. `File > Export As...`
8. Choose `GOGITUM Export ACE - pTileData (UBYTE)` format and export as `overworld.dat` in your res `folder`.

The map file is ready for use here : [overworld.dat](./res/overworld.dat)

### Recap

In your `res` folder you should have :

- `overworld.dat` (map)
- `overworld.gpl` (palette)
- `overworld.png` (tiles)

## Let's Code

### Assets Preprocessing

First, append your `CMakeLists.txt` file and add at the end. 

It loads and converts the palette and then use it to convert your tiles file. It also loads the map file.

```cmake
# Convert palette and background image
convertPalette(${GAME_LINKED} ${RES_DIR}/overworld.gpl ${DATA_DIR}/overworld.plt)
convertBitmaps(
  TARGET ${GAME_LINKED} PALETTE ${RES_DIR}/overworld.gpl
  INTERLEAVED SOURCES ${RES_DIR}/overworld.png
  DESTINATIONS ${DATA_DIR}/overworld.bm
)

file(COPY ${RES_DIR}/overworld.dat DESTINATION ${DATA_DIR})
```

### Update your game.c

Then on on your `game.c` or equivalent.

> Declare constants and main static variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declare constants and main static variables
```

```c
#define TILE_MAP_SIZE_X 200
#define TILE_MAP_SIZE_Y 80
#define GAME_BPP 5 // 32 colors
#define SCORE_HEIGHT 16

// View containing all the viewports
static tView *s_pView; 
// For score - won't be used in this tuto
static tVPort *s_pVpScore; // Viewport for score
static tSimpleBufferManager *s_pScoreBuffer;
// Viewport for playfield
static tVPort *s_pVpMain; 
// Your buffer manager, it will handle your scrolling
static tTileBufferManager *s_pMainBuffer;
// Tiles
static tBitMap *s_pTiles;
// Palette
static UWORD s_pPalette[1 << GAME_BPP];

static UWORD s_uwMapTileWidth;
static UWORD s_uwMapTileHeight;
//[...]
// To controle camera/view on scrolling
UWORD g_uCameraX=0;
UWORD g_uCameraY=0;
UWORD g_uCameraSpeed=2;
//[...]

```

> Then add a method to load your map. The map is loaded column by column for speed loading speed purpose :

Reviewer: Methods are functions defined within class/struct, C can't have those, so "function" it is.

```suggestion
Then, add a function to load your map. The map is loaded column by column for speed loading speed purpose :
```

> ```c

Reviewer: Code needs change of indents from tabs to spaces - markdown behaves oddly when tabs are used.

static void loadMap(void) {
	logWrite("Map Loading...\n");
	tFile *pFileTilemap = diskFileOpen("data/overworld.dat", "rb");
	fileRead(pFileTilemap, &s_uwMapTileWidth, sizeof(s_uwMapTileWidth));
	fileRead(pFileTilemap, &s_uwMapTileHeight, sizeof(s_uwMapTileHeight));
	s_uwMapTileWidth++;

> 	s_uwMapTileHeight++;

Reviewer: From what I understand, you are the author of tiled export plugin (congrats!). Perhaps it would be better to change the plugin code so that it has those values already bigger by one on the file?

Author: https://github.com/youenchene/tiled-export-to-amiga/issues/1

  	logWrite("Map Width %u",s_uwMapTileWidth);
  	logWrite("Map Height %u",s_uwMapTileHeight);
	for (int x = 0; x < s_uwMapTileWidth; x++) {
        fileRead(pFileTilemap, s_pMainBuffer->pTileData[x], s_uwMapTileHeight);
    }
	fileClose(pFileTilemap); 
	logWrite("Map Loaded!\n");
}
```

And this method (in a next iteration of the tutorial I will be able to explain this one) :
```c
static void onTileDraw(
	UWORD uwTileX, UWORD uwTileY,
	tBitMap *pBitMap, UWORD uwBitMapX, UWORD uwBitMapY
) {
}
```

> Then in your `gameGsCreate` method :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, in your `gameGsCreate` function:
```

```c

>   // To move scrolling
>   keyCreate(); // We'll use keyboard
> 	joyOpen();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // To move scrolling
  keyCreate();
	joyOpen();
```

Author: OK.

  // Load tiles
	s_pTiles = bitmapCreateFromPath("data/overworld.bm", 0);

	logWrite("Tiles Loaded!\n");

  // Init your scrolling tile buffer 
	s_pMainBuffer = tileBufferCreate(0,
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_VPORT, s_pVpMain,  // Select View Port
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_BITMAP_FLAGS, BMF_CLEAR | BMF_INTERLEAVED,  // If you put interleaved there, it should be also in your cmakelist part.
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_BOUND_TILE_X, TILE_MAP_SIZE_X, // Map size in number of tile
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_BOUND_TILE_Y, TILE_MAP_SIZE_Y, // Map size in number of tile
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_IS_DBLBUF, 1, // Activatey double buffering
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_TILE_SHIFT, 4, //Size of tile, given in bitshift. Set to 4 for 16px, 5 for 32px, etc. Mandatory.
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_REDRAW_QUEUE_LENGTH, 200, // cursor between handling fast scrolling versus your amiga power
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_CALLBACK_TILE_DRAW, onTileDraw, // To be documented
		TAG_TILEBUFFER_TILESET, s_pTiles,
	TAG_END);

  // Load and apply palette
  paletteLoadFromPath("data/overworld.plt", s_pPalette, 1 << GAME_BPP);
	memcpy(s_pVpScore->pPalette, s_pPalette, sizeof(s_pVpScore->pPalette));
	memcpy(s_pVpMain->pPalette, s_pPalette, sizeof(s_pVpMain->pPalette));

	loadMap();

>   // End of IO let's display somme stuff - unlaod OS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // IO operations end here - let's unlaod the OS and display some stuff
```

Author: ok

	systemUnuse();

	logWrite("Camera Reset\n");
	cameraReset(s_pMainBuffer->pCamera, 0, 0, s_uwMapTileWidth*16, s_uwMapTileHeight * 16, 1);

  // Initial draw
	tileBufferRedrawAll(s_pMainBuffer);

>   // Set initiale camera

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Set initial camera
```

Author: OK

	cameraSetCoord(s_pMainBuffer->pCamera, g_uCameraX, g_uCameraY);

	// Load & Display the view
	viewLoad(s_pView);
```

And in your `gameGsDestroy` method to unload memory :

```c
void gameGsDestroy(void) {
  systemUse();
  bitmapDestroy(s_pTiles);
  viewDestroy(s_pView);
  keyDestroy();
  joyClose(); 
}
```

Finally let's control our scrolling in `gameGsLoop`:

```c
  // Handle keyboard and joystick events
  keyProcess();
  joyProcess();
  //[...]//
  // Let's control your scrolling
  // Q for speeding up (A in azerty keyboard)

>   // W for speeding up (Z in azerty keyboard)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // W for speeding down (Z in azerty keyboard)
```

Author: OK

  WORD wDx = 0, wDy = 0;
	if(keyCheck(KEY_Q)) {
		g_uCameraSpeed+=1;
	}
	if(keyCheck(KEY_W)) {
		if(g_uCameraSpeed>1) {
			g_uCameraSpeed-=1;
		}
	}
  // Joy direction to move

> 	if(joyCheck(JOY1_UP)) {

Reviewer: perhaps it's worth to add `|| keyCheck(KEY_UP)` etc?

Author: Yep good ID.

```cmake
# Convert palette and background image
convertPalette(${GAME_LINKED} ${RES_DIR}/overworld.gpl ${DATA_DIR}/overworld.plt)
convertBitmaps(
  TARGET ${GAME_LINKED} PALETTE ${RES_DIR}/overworld.gpl
  INTERLEAVED SOURCES ${RES_DIR}/overworld.png
  DESTINATIONS ${DATA_DIR}/overworld.bm
)

file(COPY ${RES_DIR}/overworld.dat DESTINATION ${DATA_DIR})
```

### Update your game.c

Then on on your `game.c` or equivalent.

Declare constants and main static variables

```c
#define TILE_MAP_SIZE_X 200
#define TILE_MAP_SIZE_Y 80
#define GAME_BPP 5 // 32 colors
#define SCORE_HEIGHT 16

// View containing all the viewports
static tView *s_pView; 
// For score - won't be used in this tuto
static tVPort *s_pVpScore; // Viewport for score
static tSimpleBufferManager *s_pScoreBuffer;
// Viewport for playfield
static tVPort *s_pVpMain; 
// Your buffer manager, it will handle your scrolling
static tTileBufferManager *s_pMainBuffer;
// Tiles
static tBitMap *s_pTiles;
// Palette
static UWORD s_pPalette[1 << GAME_BPP];

static UWORD s_uwMapTileWidth;
static UWORD s_uwMapTileHeight;
//[...]
// To controle camera/view on scrolling

> UWORD g_uCameraX=0;
> UWORD g_uCameraY=0;
> UWORD g_uCameraSpeed=2;

Reviewer: Another one which I've haven't catched earlier on: accoring to ACE codestyle, UWORD prefix is `uw` and not `u`. Also needs refactoring of relevant code.

```suggestion
UWORD g_uwCameraX=0;
UWORD g_uwCameraY=0;
UWORD g_uwCameraSpeed=2;
```

//[...]

```

> Then, add a function to load your map. The map is loaded column by column for speed loading speed purpose :

Reviewer: Oops, haven't catched that earlier!

```suggestion
Then, add a function to load your map. The map is loaded column by column for speed purpose :
```
